Carbon
=============================================================
Carbon is a Ruby API wrapper for the Brighter Planet Carbon Middleware service. Use it to calculate emissions generated by certain activities, such as flights, automobile travel, housing, etc.

See http://carbon.brighterplanet.com/ for more information.

Installation
-------------------------------------------------------------
    > gem install carbon

Usage
-------------------------------------------------------------
Carbon works by extending any Ruby class you're using to represent an activity. For instance, let's say you have a RentalCar class that represents a rental car on your lot:

    class RentalCar
      attr_accessor :year, :make, :model, :fuel_efficiency, :daily_distance_average,
        :purchase_date, :retirement_date
    end

In order to calculate carbon emissions, we need to map each of the car's attributes to characteristics that are used by Carbon Middleware to calculate emissions.

    require 'carbon'
    
    class RentalCar
      include Carbon::Emitter

      attr_accessor :year, :make, :model, :fuel_efficiency, :daily_distance_average,
        :purchase_date, :retirement_date
      
      emits_as :automobile do
        provides :model_year, :as => :year
        provides :make
        provides :model
        provides :fuel_efficiency
        provides :daily_distance_estimate, :as => daily_distance_average
        provides :acquisition, :as => :purchase_date
        provides :retirement, :as => :retirement_date
      end
    end

When you want to calculate emissions, simply invoke RentalCar#emission. This returns an object that provides the amount of emissions generated (#value) and the URL users can use to view the methodology used for the calculation (#methodology_url).

    my_car = RentalCar.new(...)
    puts "I generated #{my_car.emission.value} lbs of CO2e"

That's it! This gem also fits right in with your ActiveRecord models.
