= Carbon

Carbon is a Ruby API wrapper and command-line console for the {Brighter Planet emission estimate web service}[http://carbon.brighterplanet.com], which is located at http://carbon.brighterplanet.com. By querying the web service, it can estimate the carbon emissions of many real-life objects, such as cars and houses, based on particular attributes that they may have.

Full documentation: {RDoc}[http://rdoc.info/projects/brighterplanet/carbon]

== Quick start 1: experimenting with the console

<b>You'll need a Brighter Planet API key. See the "API keys" section below for details.</b>

First get the gem:

    $ gem install carbon

Then start the console:

    $ carbon
    carbon->

Provide your key:

    carbon-> key '123ABC'
      => Using key 123ABC
      
Start a flight calculation:

    carbon-> flight
      => 1210.66889895298 kg CO2e
    flight*>

Start providing characteristics:

    flight*> origin_airport 'jfk'
      => 1593.46008200024 kg CO2e
    flight*> destination_airport 'lax'
      => 1766.55536727522 kg CO2e

Review what you've entered:

    flight*> characteristics
      => origin_airport: jfk
         destination_airport: lax

See how the calculation's being made:

    flight*> methodology
      => emission: from fuel and passengers with coefficients
         [ ... ]
         cohort: from t100
         
See intermediate calculations:

    flight*> reports
      => emission: 1766.55536727522
         [ ... ]
         cohort: {"members"=>262}

Generate a methodology URL:

    flight*> url
      => http://carbon.brighterplanet.com/flights.json?origin_airport=jfk&destination_airport=lax&key=123ABC

And when you're done:

    flight*> done
      => Saved as flight #0
    carbon->

You can recall this flight anytime during this same session:

    carbon-> flight 0
      => 1766.55536727522 kg CO2e
    flight*> characteristics
      => origin_airport: jfk
         destination_airport: lax
         
For more, see the "Console" section below.

== Quick start 2: using the library in your application

<b>You'll need a Brighter Planet API key. See the "API keys" section below for details.</b>

First get the gem:

    $ gem install carbon

Carbon works by extending any Ruby class you're using to represent an emission source. For instance, let's say you have a Ruby class <tt>RentalCar</tt> that represents a rental car on your lot. (Note that ActiveRecord models work great with this gem.)

    class RentalCar
      attr_accessor :model, :model_year, :fuel_economy
      class Make
        attr_accessor :name
        def to_param
          name
        end
      end
      def make
        @make ||= Make.new
      end
    end

In order to calculate carbon emissions, we need to map the car's relevant attributes to characteristics that the {web service}[http://carbon.brighterplanet.com] will recognize. In this case, a review of the available characteristics for Automobile[http://carbon.brighterplanet.com/automobiles/options] yields the following map:

    class RentalCar
      # [...]
      include Carbon
      emit_as :automobile do
        provide :make
        provide :model
        provide :model_year
        provide :fuel_economy, :as => :fuel_efficiency
      end
    end

When you want to calculate emissions, simply call <tt>RentalCar#emission_estimate</tt>.

    > my_car = RentalCar.new([...])
    => #<RentalCar [...]>
    > my_emission = my_car.emission_estimate
    => #<Carbon::EmissionEstimate [...]>
    > my_emission.to_f
    => 4919.2
    > my_emission.emission_units
    => "kilograms"
    > my_emission.methodology
    => "http://carbon.brighterplanet.com/automobiles.html?[...]"

== API keys

You should get an API key from http://keys.brighterplanet.com and set it globally:

    Carbon.key = '12903019230128310293'

Now all of your queries will use that key.

== Timeframes

You submit this query about a flight in 2009, but the result is 0.0 kilograms. Why?
    
http://carbon.brighterplanet.com/flights.html?date=2009-10-13

It's telling you that a flight in 2009 did not result in any 2011 emissions. Try this:

http://carbon.brighterplanet.com/flights.html?date=2009-10-13&timeframe=2009

That will tell you 850 kilograms emitted in 2009. If you need more specific timeframes, use the full form:
  
http://carbon.brighterplanet.com/flights.html?date=2009-10-13&timeframe=2009-01-01/2012-01-01

More information about timeframes at the {timeframe gem}[http://rubygems.org/gems/timeframe].

== Attribute serialization

Your objects' attributes are serialized via <tt>#to_characteristic</tt> or <tt>#to_param</tt> (in that order of preference) before being submitted to the web service. 

For example:

    class RentalCar < ActiveRecord::Base
      belongs_to :automobile_make
      emit_as :automobile do
        provide :automobile_make, :as => :make
      end
    end
    
    class AutomobileMake < ActiveRecord::Base # schema includes :name
      has_many :rental_cars
      alias :to_characteristic :name
    end
    
Without <tt>AutomobileMake#to_characteristic</tt>, the library would have no way of knowing how to serialize.

== Using timeouts

    > RentalCar.new.emission_estimate :timeout => 100
    
Runs a realtime request but allows timing out the network call. Raises <tt>Timeout::Error</tt> if timeout is exceeded.

== Persisted queries

You can specify that the result be persisted in low-latency storage so that future identical requests can use the same estimate:

    > RentalCar.new.emission_estimate :guid => 'A_GLOBALLY_UNIQUE_IDENTIFIER_FOR_THIS_EMISSION_ESTIMATE'

== Asynchronous queries

=== Using a callback

To specify that the result of a query should be POSTed back to you, simply pass an URL as the <tt>:callback</tt> option to <tt>#emission_estimate</tt>:

    > RentalCar.new.emission_estimate :callback => 'http://example.com/my/callback/handler'

A good way to test this is to set up a {PostBin}[http://postbin.org].

=== Using polling

By combining <tt>:guid</tt> and <tt>:defer => true</tt>, you can poll for a result:

    > batmobile.emission_estimate :guid => '[...]', :defer => true
    # Do other things . . . and then:
    > batmobile.emission_estimate :guid => '[...]'

If the result isn't available by the time you want it, a standard synchronous estimate will be provided.

== Exceptions

Since this gem connects to a web service, you need to be ready for network problems and latency. For example:

    begin
      my_emission = my_car.emission_estimate
    rescue ::SocketError, ::EOFError, ::Timeout::Error, ::Errno::ETIMEDOUT, ::Errno::ENETUNREACH, ::Errno::ECONNRESET, ::Errno::ECONNREFUSED
      # These are general network errors raised by Net::HTTP.
      # Your internet connection might be down.
    rescue ::Carbon::RateLimited
      # In order to prevent denial-of-service attacks, our servers limit request rates.
      # The gem will try up to three times to get an answer back from the server, waiting slightly longer each time.
      # If you still get this exception, please contact us at staff@brighterplanet.com and we'll lift your rate.
    rescue ::Carbon::RealtimeEstimateFailed
      # Our server returned a 4XX or 5XX error.
      # Please contact us at staff@brighterplanet.com.
    rescue ::Carbon::QueueingFailed
      # The gem connects directly to Amazon SQS in order to provide maximum throughput. If that service returns anything other than success, you get this exception.
      # Please contact us at staff@brighterplanet.com.
    end
    
== Console

This library includes a special console for performing calculations interactively. Quick Start #1 provides an example session. Here is a command reference:

=== Shell mode

[+help+]                           Displays a list of emitter types.
[+key+ _yourkey_]                  Set the {developer key}[http://keys.brighterplanet.com] that should be used for this session. Alternatively, put this key in <tt>~/.carbon_middleware</tt> and it will be auto-selected on console startup.
[+_emitter_type_+]                 (e.g. +flight+) Enters emitter mode using this emitter type.
[<tt><i>emitter_type num</i></tt>] (e.g. <tt>flight 0</tt>) Recalls a previous emitter from this session.
[+exit+]                           Quits.
  
=== Emitter mode

[+help+]                               Displays a list of characteristics for this emitter type.
[<tt><i>characteristic value</i></tt>] (e.g. <tt>origin_airport 'lax'</tt>) Provide a characteristic. Remember, this is Ruby we're dealing with, so strings must be quoted.
[+emission+]                           Displays the current emission in kilograms CO2e for this emitter.
[+lbs+, +pounds+, or +tons+]           Display the emission using different units.
[+characteristics+]                    Lists the characteristics you have provided so far.
[+methodology+]                        Summarizes how the calculation is being made.
[+reports+]                            Displays intermediate calculations that were made in pursuit of the emission estimate.
[+url+]                                Generates a methodology URL suitable for pasting into your browser for further inspection.
[+done+]                               Saves this emitter and returns to shell mode.

== Copyright

Copyright (c) 2011 Brighter Planet.
